# Medical Speech Translator The **Medical Speech Translator** is a web application designed to facilitate real-time transcription, enhancement, and translation of medical speech. Built with **React.js**, **Material-UI**, and powered by the **Web Speech API** and **Gemini AI API**, it offers a robust solution for bridging language barriers in healthcare settings. This repository contains the source code and technical documentation for the prototype, ready for production deployment. ## Table of Contents - Overview - Features - Architecture - Installation - Usage - Deployment - Limitations - Contributing - License ## Overview The Medical Speech Translator enables healthcare professionals and patients to communicate seamlessly across languages. It transcribes spoken medical conversations in real-time, enhances medical terminology using Gemini AI, and translates the output into one of 12 supported languages. The application features a responsive, modern interface with light/dark themes and glassmorphism effects, built on a modular React architecture. For detailed technical insights, refer to the Technical Documentation. ## Features - **Real-Time Speech Recognition**: Continuously transcribes audio input using the Web Speech API, supporting multiple languages with interim and final results. - **Medical Term Enhancement**: Corrects and refines medical terminology (e.g., drugs, conditions) via Gemini AI, preserving non-medical content. - **AI-Powered Translation**: Translates enhanced transcripts into 12 languages (e.g., English, Spanish, Chinese) with context-aware accuracy. - **Multilingual Support**: Includes intuitive flag-based language selection for languages like French, German, Japanese, and more. - **Responsive UI**: Features a Material-UI interface with light/dark themes, custom scrollbars, and mobile-friendly layouts. - **Interactive Controls**: Start, stop, pause recognition, speak translated text, copy transcripts, and reset sessions. - **Robust Error Handling**: Gracefully manages microphone permissions, API failures, and recognition errors with user-friendly alerts. ## Architecture The application is a single-page React application with a modular, component-based structure: - **App.jsx**: Orchestrates state management, API interactions, and rendering. - **SpeechRecognitionService**: Custom class for Web Speech API integration. - **Components**: - `Header.jsx`: Displays title and theme toggle. - `LanguageSelector.jsx`: Handles input/output language selection with a swap feature. - `Controls.jsx`: Manages speech controls and audio level feedback. - `TranscriptPanel.jsx`: Renders tabbed transcripts with copy/speak/reset options. - **theme.js**: Defines Material-UI light (`#072c52`) and dark (`#6fbd7f`) themes. - **External Integrations**: - **Web Speech API**: For transcription and text-to-speech. - **Gemini AI API**: For medical enhancement and translation. ### File Structure ``` ├── src/ │ ├── components/ │ │ ├── Header.jsx │ │ ├── LanguageSelector.jsx │ │ ├── Controls.jsx │ │ ├── TranscriptPanel.jsx │ ├── themes/ │ │ ├── theme.js │ ├── App.jsx ├── Technical Documentation.pdf ├── README.md ├── package.json ├── .env ``` ## Installation ### Prerequisites - **Node.js** (>=16.x) - **npm** or **yarn** - A modern browser (e.g., Chrome, Firefox) supporting the Web Speech API - A valid **Gemini AI API key** ### Steps 1. **Clone the Repository**: ```bash git clone https://github.com/your-username/medical-speech-translator.git cd medical-speech-translator ``` 2. **Install Dependencies**: ```bash npm install ``` 3. **Configure Environment Variables**: - Create a `.env` file in the root directory. - Add your Gemini AI API key: ``` VITE_OPENAI_API_KEY=your-gemini-api-key ``` 4. **Run the Development Server**: ```bash npm run dev ``` Open `http://localhost:5173` in your browser. ## Usage 1. **Select Languages**: - Choose input (spoken) and output (translated) languages from the dropdowns. - Use the swap button to reverse languages. 2. **Start Transcription**: - Click the "Start" button to begin real-time speech recognition. - Speak clearly; the app enhances medical terms and translates the transcript. 3. **View Transcripts**: - Toggle between "Original Transcript" and "Translated Transcript" tabs. - Copy, speak, or reset transcripts using the provided controls. 4. **Manage Sessions**: - Pause or stop recognition as needed. - Monitor status updates (e.g., “Listening…”, “Translating…”). For detailed instructions, refer to the Technical Documentation. ## Deployment 1. **Build the Application**: ```bash npm run build ``` 2. **Host on a Static Server**: - Deploy the `dist/` folder to a static hosting service (e.g., Netlify, Vercel, or Percel as mentioned in the documentation). - Ensure the `VITE_OPENAI_API_KEY` is set in the hosting environment. 3. **CORS Considerations**: - Gemini API calls are client-side, requiring no server-side proxy. ## Limitations - **API Dependency**: Requires a valid Gemini API key and internet connectivity. - **Latency**: AI processing may introduce 1–3 second delays for complex transcripts. - **Browser Support**: Limited to Web Speech API-compatible browsers (e.g., Chrome, Firefox). - **Language Coverage**: Supports 12 languages, extensible with additional configuration. ## Contributing We welcome contributions to enhance the Medical Speech Translator! To contribute: 1. Fork the repository. 2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/your-feature`). 3. Commit changes (`git commit -m "Add your feature"`). 4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/your-feature`). 5. Open a Pull Request. Please adhere to the Code of Conduct and include tests for new features. ## License This project is licensed under the MIT License. --- Built with ❤️ by the Medical Speech Translator Team
